* A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check gutenberg.ca/links/licence.html before proceeding. 

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under
copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your
country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT
IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: Mr. Bumps and his Monkey
Date of first publication: 1942
Place and date of edition used as base for this ebook: New York, 1942 (first edition) 
Author: Walter de la Mare (1873-1956)
Date first posted: 1 July 2007
Date last updated: 1 July 2007
Project Gutenberg Canada ebook #1

This ebook was produced by: Dr Mark Bear Akrigg





MR. BUMPS AND HIS MONKEY

by

WALTER DE LA MARE




There was once a sailor of the name of John Bumps. He had bright
blue eyes and wore gold rings in his ears. Although, when this
story begins, Mr. Bumps was still quite young, he had three
children--Topsy, Emmanuel, and Kate--who lived with their mother
in a nice little house with square windows in Portsmouth, and he
had often been round the world. He had sailed into most of its
ports in all kinds of weather; and there was scarcely an island
of great beauty or marvel that he couldn't tick off on his tarry
fingers.

Now one day, a little the right side of the rainy season, he came
again to the west coast of Africa. His ship, _The Old Lion_--and
he was her second mate--had been sailing south down that great
coast, past the Canaries and the Green Islands, past the Ivory
and the Gold and the Slave Coasts to Banana and the noble Congo;
and not long after that Mr. Bumps went ashore. He was paddled up
the river Quanza, dark and green, past Dondo, to visit an old
friend. And there in a village of the black men, for two
green-and-red bead necklaces and a jackknife, he bought a monkey.

Mr. Bumps had now and then bought other monkeys, and he knew this
was a high price for one in that part of the country. But his
friend, the chief of the Mlango-Nlango tribe, who was exceedingly
fat, and wore two blankets besides his beads and ivories, assured
Mr. Bumps this was no ordinary monkey.

The chief's round, black face, with its two rows of flashing
teeth, broke into an immense smile as he told Mr. Bumps this. "Ee
no skittle-skattle monk-ee, no," he said, for he had often traded
with the English. "Ee----," but instead of finishing the
sentence, he shut his eyes and put one black hand on the top of
his head, though what exactly he meant, Mr. Bumps could not tell.
At first glimpse of the monkey, however, Mr. Bumps had known at
once that whatever pleasant things the chief might say of it they
would be true. Besides, the chief was an old friend of his, and
wouldn't tell him lies.

On the other hand, since the hairy little fellow stood an inch or
so under the common stature of monkeys of its kind, it was of no
great size, and there was nothing else remarkable that
showed--not then. As Mr. Bumps held it on his arm, in its
long-skirted crimson coat, which one of the chief's wives had
made out of the royal cloth, it sat far less heavy indeed than
would his younger daughter, Kate. And she herself was very small
for her age.

But it had a neat, pretty head, wonderfully slender hands, and
long thumbs, and as it turned its solemn hazel eyes on Mr. Bumps,
he suddenly felt acutely homesick. He had been more than once
more than half round the world without feeling that. "It's no
good longing," he would say, "when you've got to wait."

And then something which Mr. Bumps had not expected at all
happened. It was this. His eyes, as has been said already, were
of a particularly bright blue; and as the blue of his blue eyes
met the gazing hazel of the monkey's, the creature stirred on his
arm, opened its mouth, and made a remark. Mr. Bumps had never
paid much attention to foreign tongues, and he did not understand
what it said. Nevertheless, he knew what it meant. He knew for
certain that the tiny, liquid syllables which had issued from the
small mouth were a message from friend to friend.

He bade a cheerful good-by to the chief, kissed his hand to the
black lady who had brought the monkey into his hut, and went off
again down to the river. He took aboard _The Old Lion_ a good
store of nuts, bananas, and other fruit; and as that evening he
looked back at the coast, shining in the last of the sun--and
_The Old Lion_ was now some miles out to sea--he turned to his
monkey and said, "How do you like the sound of the name Jasper,
sonny?"

The monkey softly-turned to him as if to answer, but this time
said nothing.

So Jasper he was called, although this was really due to a
mistake on the part of Mr. Bumps. What had come into his mind, as
he stood at the taffrail looking back at the coast of Africa,
were the first two lines of a hymn that had been a favorite of
his mother's--

  _From Greenland's icy mountains_
  _To India's coral strand._

But in saying the words over to himself he had got the last but
one word wrong. He had said:

  _From Greenland's icy mountains_
  _To India's Jasper strand._

Still, Jasper, he thought, was a better name than Coral, and
Jasper it remained.

There never was a monkey so quick to learn, so grave in the
learning, and so quiet and pleasant in manner as Jasper. Mr.
Bumps could only guess how old he was, and he guessed, "p'raps
five." And since the famous little son of John Evelyn even before
this age could all but talk in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, it may
not be so marvelous as it sounds that Jasper soon began to pick
up a few words of English. Long before this, however, he had
learned to sit at table and say his grace (in his own tongue); to
use a knife and fork, and a mug for his drink; to bow when spoken
to; to swing his own hammock, and little things like that.

He would creep up, too, to watch the man at the wheel or the cook
at his cooking in the galley or caboose. He would gaze for
minutes at a time at the compass and lamp in the binnacle, and
would salute the captain whenever he saw him on the bridge. He
knew the Christian names of every man jack of the crew, and where
each of them slept in the fo'c'sle; he could manage a little rope
splicing, and knew the difference between a granny and a reef
knot, a loop and a fisherman's bend! In spite of his red cossack
gown, he could scamper up the rigging to the truck or very summit
of the mainmast twice as quick as any cabin boy, though no cabin
boy of course has any tail to help.

Besides all this, Mr. Bumps taught Jasper much else. Not that he
sat him down and made him learn. It amused him and Jasper enjoyed
it. It was a long voyage, too. _The Old Lion_ edged into the
doldrums and there was plenty of time.

As the days and weeks drew by, Jasper became as much at home on
_The Old Lion_ with his friend Mr. Bumps as if he had been born
to the sea. Merely because he was jimp and hairy, had a small,
flat-nosed face, and showed his teeth when he talked, the sailors
at first would tease and laugh at him, deeming him only a pet or
a plaything. As soon as he began to talk King's English, however,
they teased him no more. He said things they remembered.

What Mr. Bumps meant to do with him when he was safe home in his
little house in Portsmouth he hardly knew. He was sure his wife,
whose name was Emma, would be pleased to see his new friend, and
there was no doubt at all about Topsy, Emmanuel, and Kate. But
how could he ever part with Jasper now? Yet how expect him to
lead a sea life? There was, however, no need to decide anything
for the present; and meanwhile he took almost as fond a care of
him--sought him out dainties, physicked him when sick--as Mrs.
Bumps was taking of their little Kate.

At last, and Mr. Bumps had long since made up his mind that he
could never of his own wish be separated from Jasper, _The Old
Lion_ drew into the English Channel. She was nearly home. And
one misty afternoon in November she sailed slowly up the Thames
and dropped anchor in the Pool of London. It was bitter cold, but
still, and a haze of the color of copper hung over the mighty
city. And there in the midst, like an enormous leaden beehive
against the sullen sky, rose the dome of St. Paul's.

Mr. Bumps stepped ashore early next morning, with the monkey
hooded upon his arm, some presents for his wife and children in
his bag, and set out briskly for his railway station. He had not
been in old England for many months, and the first thing in his
mind was to get down to Portsmouth as soon as he possibly could.
But the haze that had been high over the city the day before had
now descended into its streets, and Mr. Bumps had to grope on in
the direction of the Monument and Pudding Lane through a fog
which grew steadily denser.

He knew, at last, that he had lost his bearings. And when
presently he came to a little public house, _The Three Swans_,
its windows dimly glowing in the fog, he decided to go in and ask
his way. But, somehow or other, he didn't like the notion that
Jasper should go in, too. He glanced into the little face under
its hood, and saw how cold and doleful it looked. But he was
afraid the thick tobacco smoke and the smell of the beer and
spirits in _The Three Swans_ might make him ill.

So, "Sit you here a moment, Jasper," he said, as he put him down
beside his bag beside the lamppost, "and don't 'ee stir till I
come back."

But, alas, Mr. Bumps stayed many minutes longer than he had
intended to inside _The Three Swans_, and when he came back,
though his bag was still there where he had left it, Jasper was
gone.

Indeed, Jasper had been patiently waiting in the fog in the dim
light of the lamppost for no more than five of them, when a
stranger, with a black hat on his head, a black beard, and a coat
reaching almost to his heels, had come by. If the monkey had not
stirred at that moment, all might have been well. But, at sound
of these footsteps in the strange, cold London street, the
solitary creature had lifted his face and put out a hand, for he
had made many friends on board ship. And the stranger stooped and
looked at him.

Now, by a chance, whether evil or not it is hard to say, this man
with the dark beard was a dealer in all kinds of animals. He had
a shop in a narrow alley not far from the river. That shop went
back, and every now and then up two or three steps, at least
forty paces. And from end to end of it there were cages of all
kinds of birds and small beasts, besides tanks of fish and of
rare snakes and lizards, and even gauze-covered cages of
butterflies on rows of shelves. His larger animals he kept,
though out of the rain, in a stone-flagged yard.

He stooped down, his rusty, black coat brushing the paving
stones, and in the foggy gloom looked long into Jasper's face.
Then he took the little, narrow hand in his, and gently shook it.

"How d'ye do?" he said, in a wheedling voice, and speaking
through his nose. "Very pleased to meet you, I'm sure."

And Jasper, with his usual gentle manners, and thinking no harm
of him, looked up into his face and chattered a few sounds, which
were uncommonly like sea-English.

The stranger shot one swift, thieflike glance over his shoulder,
then, opening a button of his greatcoat, gingerly lifted Jasper
from where he sat, slipped him in under it, and strode rapidly
away.

Before evening, Jasper found himself, with a few monkey nuts and
a can of water, squatting alone in a cage, surrounded by other
cages in which, besides barking dogs and scrambling puppies, were
scores of white rabbits and rats and cats--Manx, tabby, and
Siamese--squirrels, ferrets, stoats, tortoises, owls, lovebirds,
canaries, parrots, parakeets, and macaws; and in the midst of a
din and screaming of voices more deafening by far than he had
ever heard in his own West African forests, or in the middle of a
storm at sea. He sat shivering and trembling in his gown, and at
last pushed his head in under its furry hood, muttering to
himself in small, mournful, monkey accents, "Mr. Bumps. Mr.
Bumps. O Mr. Bumps!"

But Mr. Bumps, having in great grief given up his friend for
lost, was long since in the train and on his way in spite of the
fog to his little square-windowed house in Portsmouth, and back
to his Emma, his Topsy, Emmanuel, and Kate.

Jasper did not stay long in Mr. Moss's animal shop, only for nine
days and nine nights. But at the end of them he had already begun
to pine and droop, could scarcely eat, and seldom opened his
eyes. He missed his friend the sailor, and his care and kindness;
though whenever Mr. Moss himself, or the sharp-nosed,
tallow-faced young man that helped in the shop, looked in at his
cage and spoke to him, he looked solemnly back, without showing
either his teeth or his temper. He never clutched at his food
when it was pushed in through the wire door, nor did he even
attempt to make any sound in response to what they said to him.
He sat there, his hands folded under his gown, like some small,
hairy king deprived of his kingdom. Mr. Moss and his young man
had never seen his like before, and even in this short time they
had both discovered that they could not face out the little
creature's dwelling eyes.

But though Jasper sat for the most part so quiet and motionless
in his cage that he might seem, at first sight, to be fast
asleep, or even stuffed, all day long his ears and wits (and now
and then his eyes) were busy. He would watch the Belgian canary
birds which Mr. Moss, during their molting, had fed on special
seed and cayenne pepper to brighten their feathers, for hours at
a time. There was an enormous python, too, coiled up in straw not
far away, and for a long time he hardly dared to look at it. But
at last he made himself watch that too; and he never ceased to
listen to the talk between Mr. Moss and his tallow-faced
assistant, and the strange human beings that came into the shop.
Strange talk in the shop, too, he heard between his fellow
captives.

Mr. Moss himself, though if Jasper had been like other ordinary
monkeys he would have soon forgotten it, never felt _wholly_ at
ease at the thought that he had stolen this one. Odd, unlucky
things began to happen in the shop. He himself upset a glass case
full of death's-head moths. It frightened him--their tiny feet on
his skin and the fanning of their sepulchral wings. The python
one night, having managed to glide out of her tank, devoured a
mandarin duck at one gulp, and escaped into London. And when his
assistant, first thing in the morning, tripped over a broom that
had been left on the floor of the shop and broke his left leg,
his master began to think that it would be as well to get rid of
Jasper as soon as he could.

So when one afternoon an acquaintance of his, who had once been a
showman and trainer of animals for a circus, stepped into his
shop and inquired how much he wanted for Jasper, the price he
asked him was so very moderate that his friend paid it down at
once and carried the monkey off with him, there and then. At
first sight of Jasper he, too, had become homesick for the ring
lights and the tan and the tinsel and the ambling horses, and had
determined to begin again.

"And what do you call him?" he asked Mr. Moss.

"Call him? Why, what he calls hisself, day in, day out, and even
in his sleep!--Jasper."

"Ah, now, Jasper?" repeated his friend.

He was a dark man, hollow-cheeked and lean; and he wore his hair
long over his ears. His name was Mr. J. Smith, but he changed
this on the programs and playbills, when he was showing his
animals, to Signor Dolcetto Antonio. Unlike one or two
black-hearted miscreants who followed his trade, he believed in
kindness and common sense.

"There are five things," he would say to his wife, "all things
breathing-buffalos to bullfinches--_need_; like you and me, Amy:
food, shelter, sleep, company, and freedom." And he gave his
animals nearly as much as they could wish of them--all except the
last.

Away from the cold and noise and stench and darkness of Mr.
Moss's shop, Jasper soon began to be himself again. His appetite
returned, his eyes brightened, he looked sleek and nimble. He was
soon as well as could be expected, with his bosom friend Mr.
Bumps gone, and himself so far from his own land.

In order to take all possible care of his charge, Signor Antonio
brought him home to where he lived with his wife, in the upper
parts of a house in Jay Street, Soho. Part of this house was a
shop that sold wine and oil and coffee and macaroni and olives
and sausages and other kinds of foreign meats and drinks. In the
rest, first floor to roof, lived Mr. and Mrs. Smith. Here, beside
the fire in their small parlor, they made Jasper as cosy as they
could--in a little chamber to himself.

For two hours every morning, Signor Antonio would talk to Jasper
and teach him tricks. When he was gone out to do his business,
Mrs. Smith, busy herself over her cooking and housework, would
talk to him, too. She was a very stout woman, much stouter than
the chief of the Mlango-Nlangoes. And, like the chief, she was
full of good humor and had a kind heart. She took particular
pleasure in children and animals; and at the Zoo would not only
cheep to the birds and stroke the gazelles, but nod and smile at
the orangutans and hippopotami. She treated Jasper as if he were
a long-lost son.

Her husband had soon discovered that Jasper was a monkey that had
no equal. He was as different from other monkeys as chalk from
cheese. He learned everything he was taught with ease and
alacrity, and could soon chatter away to his friend, almost as if
he had known English all his life. If he looked five, he could
certainly talk like two and a half. But, though he was so
teachable and sweet-tempered and serious in his manners, there
was something about him that never ceased to perplex Mr. Smith.

He felt this in particular when, his lessons done, Jasper would
sit quietly in his chair, waiting for his midday meal. He had an
air, at such times, as if he were brooding on something of which
Mr. Smith had not the least notion. He seemed to be so far away
that even Mr. Smith never ventured to ask him what he was
thinking about, or to summon him back to dark Soho.

Merely to look at, Jasper was a comfort to the eye. Mr. Smith,
though he was a good-natured man, was as awkward and clumsy as a
saucepan with too long a handle to it. He was all angles. Mrs.
Smith, who was even more good-natured than her husband, sat and
talked with no more grace than a feather bed. But Jasper, even in
the least motion of his small body, turn of the head, of the
hand, of the foot, was quiet as flowing water and delicate as the
flowers beside it. When he touched, it was as if thistledown had
settled at his finger tips. When he stretched out his fingers to
take an apple, it was like the movement of a shadow through the
air. He would sidle along Mrs. Smith's curtain rod without
stirring one wooden ring; and if she were near, would be allowed
to follow her out on to the roof where she sometimes sat, in
spite of smoke and smuts, sewing a hem and looking over London.
Jasper would balance himself in his gown on the edge of the
tallest of the red chimney pots, glancing north, south, east, and
west, and not a finger tip to keep his balance!

If he was this to look at, what can he have been in his secret
mind--with its memories and dreams and sedate ponderings, river
and forest, the terrors and dangers and delights of vast Africa,
or rather of his own particular dark green corner of it?




What I feel about our friend over there," Mr. Smith said to his
wife one day, when Jasper sat asleep in his chair, "what I feel
is, that he could learn me a sight more than I can learn
_him_--of what, I mean, _matters_, my love. He's that privy yet
polite you don't know where you are. And what I feel, too, is
that there's something little short of shameful in letting a mere
mob of humans come paying their half crowns and shillings and
sixpences just to stare at him. He talks to us; but, bless you,
he only talks to us about what he knows we can understand. He
don't tell us his secrets. Never. The truth is, he ought not to
have been took away from where he came from, though where that
was, nobody knows. No Moss ever got such a mystery by rights.
Never. He's had a queer past, has that little monk; mark _me_."

And Mrs. Smith, though in her heart she agreed with her husband,
thought it would be unwise to say so.

"Don't you fret, Jim," she replied. "He has plenty to eat and
keep him busy. Worry! Not he! Look at him there, sleeping as
peaceful as a baby, as if there wasn't a coconut or a black man
in the world. He's as happy as the day is long."

"Coconuts!" said her husband, but he was not convinced.

At last, one early morning, a happy thought came into Mrs.
Smith's mind.

"What by and by would be really fair and square, Jim," she said,
as she was combing her hair by the glass, "what by and by would
be nice and proper, would be for you to take half of what you
make out of Jasper, and him take the other half. Once he began to
earn a bit of money, we could teach him what money _means_.
After all, Jim, it's only a sort of short cut for bread and
cheese and tables and chairs and clothes and houses--not to
mention the time what's taken in making them; and he would soon
pick it up. Then, maybe, he might like to get a few little things
for himself. He might like to set up, with some cash in the bank,
as an independent gentleman. Judging from what I've seen of the
world, he has twice as much sense as most such, and not a shadow
of any vices; and I don't see anything against it."

Mr. Smith looked at his wife in astonishment. Nor was it merely
because she had been speaking with her mouth full of hairpins. It
was because she would seem for days together not to agree with a
single word he said, and then, of a sudden, out would come a
notion that made everything plain and easy. So it was with
Jasper.

About nine months after he had brought him home, Mr. Smith became
perfectly certain that there was nothing else he could teach his
charge. Jasper could make a speech, could sing, and draw pictures
of forests and ships with a box of colored chalks. He could
scribble down simple sums up to fractions on a blackboard, and
find an answer. He could manage everything to the last nicety
with his clothes. During the week he was dressed in scarlet
breeches and a green coat, with ivory buttons. On Sundays, he
wore a lightly starched ruff round his neck, a gown to his heels,
and fine shoes. For out-of-doors he had two or three different
cloaks. Not that Mr. Smith _kept_ him to human clothes, or human
ways either. Jasper agreed he must grow used to them. Whenever he
so fancied, he went bare; and, if he wished, he kept two
Sunday-clothes days in one week. But this was very seldom.

He knew many simple rimes, and Mr. Smith had made a little harp
for him--very rough but tunable. To this he would sing these
rimes, and other airs, and a curious music also, whose meaning he
kept to himself. More than once, indeed, Mr. Smith had been
awakened early in the morning to hear Jasper playing on his harp
in the next room. And then, while both the words and tune seemed
to be of his own making or remembering, there sounded a cadence
in them that almost made him weep. By good fortune Mrs. Smith
slept far heavier of nights than he did.

Anyhow, there was no doubt at all, that if Signor Antonio and
Doctor Jasper--as they called themselves in the playbills--were
ever to get rich, now was the time to begin. Mr. Smith had long
since been to see the manager of the bank in which he kept his
savings, and had arranged with him to open an account in Doctor
Jasper's name. Into this each week he afterward paid Jasper's
share of their takings, which mounted up by leaps and bounds.

"You see," he had first explained to the manager, "it may be some
time before my young friend is able to come and pay his money in
himself. But I want everything open and aboveboard. When he makes
his debboo, which will be shortly, he will take half the fees and
I shall take half. And when we have made what he thinks is
enough, then he shall choose as he thinks best."

The manager, Mr. Johnson, who until then had seen only a few
photographs of Doctor Jasper, not very good likenesses either,
smiled at this arrangement. But there was no doubt that it was
all open and above-board, and he fell in with Mr. Smith's wishes.

It was in the month of December that Doctor Jasper made his first
appearance on the stage. This was in London. There was sleet that
Christmas, and a cold wind was blowing in the lamplit London
streets, when Signor Antonio and Mrs. Smith set off together in a
four-wheeled cab bound for the _Fortune_, a famous theater which
had been named after the old _Fortune_ in the days of Queen
Bess, and the Merry Wives of Windsor. "And not much more than
twenty years after it was built," Mr. Smith told Jasper, "it was
burned down to the very ground--in two hours."

"In two hours!" said Jasper.

Still, Mrs. Smith, as she reclined quietly but firmly against the
purple velvet of the cab, her back to the horse and her face to
Jasper, and her husband beside her to keep out the draft, might
herself have been one of those merry wives come to life again!

In the clear cold north wind, the tiny snowflakes vanishing as
they fell through the dark air, and with its multitudes of people
going off about their pleasure in their furs and wraps and winter
clothes, London looked as bright as a peep show.

Jasper trembled a little, and not from cold, as he gazed out of
the glass cab window at the passers-by. Mr. and Mrs. Smith talked
cheerfully to keep his spirits up, and sometimes made wonderfully
good fun together about some overdressed lady or gentleman they
could admire from their little inside gloom in the cab without
themselves being seen. For their hearts, too, were beating high.
But he, himself, in his warm dark corner, said nothing. The cab
trundled along down the Charing Cross Road and into Trafalgar
Square. Mr. Smith had told the cabman to take this way round to
the theater because he wanted Jasper to see the lions.

"And look, Jasper," said Mrs. Smith, when her husband had pointed
them out, "that there up there is the great Lord Nelson; and
mighty cold he must be in his cocked hat--and only one eye and
one arm, pore feller--with all that sleet falling up among them
stars."

Jasper lifted his quiet face and could but faintly detect the
great silent granite figure aloft against the sky.

"Sea," he muttered. "Seaman." But, strangely enough, Mrs. Smith,
who was usually quickness itself at following what he said,
supposed he meant to spell the word _see_ and not _sea_, and
was afraid he must be very nervous indeed of what lay in front of
him if he had gone back to his old childish way of
speaking--_See_
 ... _Man_ ... when he had first learned English. But Jasper had
other thoughts.

The cab rolled on along the Strand, and there was still enough
melting sleet in the street almost to silence its iron-tired
wheels. On and on it went, past the brightly lit shops and the
hurrying people; and in a little while drew up in a back street
where an iron lamp jutting out over the pavement lit up the stage
door.

Mr. Smith then got out of the cab. He paid the fare, and (as much
for his own good luck as for the cabman's) gave him a half crown
over. And he asked him to be waiting for them at eleven. "Eleven
sharp," he said.

Then, having handed out Mrs. Smith, he mounted the three steps,
pushed open the door, which clapped-to after them with a bang
that shook poor Jasper to the heart, and they all three entered
the theater.

"Good evening, Sam," said Mr. Smith to the stout man sitting in a
box behind a little open window by the door.

"Good evening," he replied, but his watery, gray eyes were fixed
not on Mr. Smith but on Jasper. With a turn of his small head and
a touch of his fingers, he had shown his friend that he wished to
be put down. So, one after the other--Mr. Smith, Jasper, Mrs.
Smith--the three of them ascended the flight of stone steps into
the dressing room that had been set apart for them by the manager
of the theater. And here Mr. Smith helped Jasper to spell out the
description of himself that had been printed in large capital
letters on the playbill, a copy of which was pinned to the wall.
THE FIRST APPEARANCE OF THE LEARNED AND FAMOUS DOCTOR JASPER, he
read out slowly, Jasper sagely nodding his head at every word,
THAT MINUTE MARVEL OF MONKEYLAND, AND MASTER MIMIC OF MAN!

"There," said Mrs. Smith, "that's _you_, Jasper! What do you
think of that?" But Jasper made no answer. At this moment,
trembling a little, he was gazing at the picture of himself
underneath the print. It had taken him straight home again--since
the artist, though no doubt he had done his best, had made him
look very much like a small gorilla!

When, with deft, fat hands Mrs. Smith had put the finishing
touches to his toilet, and her husband was ready, they all three
went down the stone steps again and made their way to the wings
of the stage. There, in shadow and in silence, they waited. Soon
it would be Jasper's turn. In this nook of the painted
scenery--all flowers and trees and butterflies--the framework of
which went up into the blaze of lights above, Jasper peered about
him. It was the night after Christmas, and the theater, from the
floor up to its very roof, was packed with human beings of all
ages, but, particularly, children.

By standing on tiptoe and peeping through a tiny hole in the
canvas, Jasper could see row above row of strange faces mounting
higher and higher, their eyes fixed on the five _Exceptionally
Elegant Ethiopian Elephants Engaged at Enormous Expense_ which
were now seated around their trainer on the stage. At sight of
all these faces a sigh shook him from head to foot. And he turned
away his head--and peered out to see the elephants themselves.

Four of these mighty animals, garlanded with mistletoe, were
caparisoned in bright green and silver. The fifth, and the
smallest, was dressed up as a clown, his face whitewashed, and
one eye surrounded with a diamond in red. They sat on their tubs.
They wreathed their proboscises. They greeted their trainer in a
chorus that drowned even the blare of the band. They walked on
their hind legs; they passed the bottle; they turned the handle
of their hurdy-gurdies; and the two senior elephants danced a
cumbrous polka, while the two juniors sat fanning themselves, and
the youngest with a painted poker beat time.

Then, one by one, these sage and monstrous beasts, their tiny
eyes alight with excitement, stumpy tails aswing, trailed off the
stage to their own quarters. The curtain descended. It was
Jasper's turn.

And soon all was made ready for him. A table, with books upon it,
an empty inkstand, some foolscap, and a dinner bell; two gilt
chairs covered in bright blue satin beside it, and a sofa--this
was the only furniture, apart from an umbrella stand, a palm in a
pot, and a red-and-green Axminster rug.

The music stopped. The curtain slowly rose again. And there, in
the middle of the stage. was Signor Antonio, dressed up like a
lackey in a black tail coat, and as if engaged in putting the
room in order in preparation for the coming home of his master.
And while he tidied the books and gave a last flick of his
feather brush over the fleckless satin chairs and the palm in the
pot, he kept talking to himself, though loud enough for everybody
to hear. He was explaining who he was--the faithful servant of
the great Dr. Themistocles Marmoset Jasper, the kindest and
wisest master manservant ever had, and the most famous medico in
Europe.--"In Europe, did I say?" he cried to himself, slapping
his leg with his brush. "Nay, in the WORLD!"

"_Now_, Jasper," whispered Mrs. Smith, stooping over her small
friend's head. "_World_, Jasper: that's your word, that's your
cue! On you go, and bless you, Jasper! And if, poor mite," she
breathed to herself, "you're half as nervous of the business as I
am, in spite of my size, well ... _Now_, Jasper!"

Jasper looked up at her; he let go her hand. Out of the shadows
he went, and into the light.

In his striped trousers, French-gray waistcoat, long, black
morning coat, with his gold watch chain and starched collar, high
hat in hand, he minced gently forward. His patent-leather shoes
were a little too long for him, but he managed them with ease.

At sight of his master, Jennings at once stepped forward. Doctor
Jasper gave him his hat, his cane, and his canary-colored gloves.
"Thank you, sir. Very good, sir," said Jennings. He hung the hat
on a peg and stood the cane in the stand.

The Doctor lifted his head a little as he came to the low table,
and reaching up, laid his hand upon a book. "It's a fine ssunny
morning, Jennings," he said. "Who iss my firsst pay-sshent
today?"

So dead a silence hung in the theater at first sound of these
small treble words and their soft-hissed s's one could not only
have heard a pin drop, but could have declared whether it had
fallen on its head or its point! Then a little girl, in a seat
high up in the dress circle, began to whimper a little. But she
was soon hushed, and Jennings was explaining to his master that
his first patient was the Right Honorable the Countess of
Crumpet; "and a very nice lady too, sir, as I have been told;
closely related to Lord Muffin, sir, of Teacake Castle."

Thereupon his master drew his watch from his pocket, and said:
"It iss five minut'ss after ten, Jennings. I fear her lady-sshipp
iss late."

"I will see, sir," said Jennings; "she may be in the anteroom."
And he retired.

"It's all right, Ma; it's all right," he whispered to Mrs. Smith,
as, swift and quiet as a shadow, he went whisking by. "Don't
worry. He's _safe_."

Meanwhile, and while he was gone, Jasper having taken a chair at
the gilded table, drew the long goose-quill pen from out of the
dry inkpot, and bending his small head till his flat nose almost
touched the paper, pretended to write on it.

"That will be three guine'ss," he sighed to himself, almost like
a miser as he scrawled with the pen. "Three more guine'ss!" But
though he said these words as if to himself, they were loud
enough, like Mr. Smith's, for everybody in the theater to hear;
and yet they were said so solemnly that nobody laughed.

At this moment Signor Antonio came on to the stage again, from
behind the wings. But while he had been gone, he had dressed
himself up in a bonnet, a flounced purple skirt and bustle, with
a long train, and he carried a green striped parasol. He was now,
of course, the Countess of Crumpet. Doctor Jasper bowed to the
Countess, and they both sat down. And Doctor Jasper said to the
Countess, "It iss a fine morning. Would your lady-sship, pleess,
kindly put out the tongue?"

Then he stood up on his chair to look at her tongue, and said,
"Ah! excussing me, your lady-sship, a ssorry tongue, a dreadful
tongue." And still nobody laughed. But when the Countess, with a
simper, thrust out a great man's hand in a white cotton glove
from under her Paisley shawl for Doctor Jasper to feel her
pulse--then _every_body laughed. And after that, except when
Doctor Jasper was all alone on the stage, they hardly stopped to
take breath.

And so the play went on, Jasper saying his part as if it were as
simple and easy a thing to do as it is for other apes and monkeys
to crack nuts and skin bananas. But though he seemed to all who
watched from high and low in the theater to be as the manager had
said he was--the Master Mimic of Man--this was not really true.
This was only the human way of looking at him.

All the time he was really and truly himself, and only
himself-thinking his own thoughts, gazing out of his bright,
darting, round, dark-deepened, and now almost amber-colored eyes
over the glare of the footlights at the people beyond, and at
Signor Antonio in his shawl and gloves and bonnet and bustle. And
though he smiled as he chattered, and even grinned with laughter
when, owing to a mistake made on purpose, the Countess sat down
on the floor instead of on her chair, he looked gravity itself
underneath, if one could have seen him close.

It was cold to him in London--this wintry weather; and though he
liked Mr. and Mrs. Smith, who had been very kind to him, and
though he knew quite well in his own way of thinking what a pot
of money meant, he had not liked the large, fat, black-mustached
face of the manager of the theater, and had consented to shake
hands with him only out of politeness. He took everything in good
part. And yet, he pined still for a long-lost friend, and to
return again to his own people.

And when the curtain fell at the end of his performance, his face
shrunk up as if into a mask, and his eyes suddenly shut, at sound
of the roar of voices that had broken out beyond it. Up went the
curtain again--himself and Signor Antonio in the middle of the
stage: and yet again and yet again--Doctor Jasper alone now; and
again and again, now hand in hand with the manager on one side of
him and Mr. Smith on the other. It seemed as if the audience
would shout themselves to a whisper and clap their hands off!

When at last the curtain came down and stayed down, he walked off
a little dizzily and unsteadily, and clutched at Mrs. Smith's
skirt. "Bless _me_, you poor, poor mite!" was all she could say
to him, for there were tears in her eyes, part of rejoicing and
part for pity, and she fondled his cold fingers as if he had been
a child. But small though he was, even as monkeys of his kind go,
he had been a gigantic success. The manager's face was one wide,
dark, greasy smile when once more he shook hands with him, bowed
to the ground, though it was not much more than in mockery, and
said good-night.

So the money, Jasper's share, poured into the bank until he was
by far the richest monkey in the world, even though he was, also,
the only monkey in the world that knew it. Mr. and Mrs. Smith in
all their dealings with him were as honest as the day, and they,
of course, were soon rich, too.




Now one day John Bumps came home again from sailing around the
world, as he had sailed many times before, though never without
pleasure. And even though he lived so far away from London as
Portsmouth is, he had not been two days with his family before in
large print in his newspaper he saw the name of Doctor Jasper,
and read of what he had done.

"Jasper," he repeated to himself, "why that's queer, now, _that
is_! Jasper!" He read it again and slapped his leg. "The same
name, right enough," he said to himself. "And, Solomon Davy,
surely there can't be two Jaspers, not like this! And if there
are not two Jaspers, then this Jasper must be my Jasper!"

And there and then, he'd made up his mind, for he still had a
good deal of money in his pocket after his voyage, that he would
take Mrs. Bumps and Topsy and Emmanuel and Kate right up to
London so that they could go to the Fortune, and see this Jasper
with their own eyes. Even if he were not his old friend of the
Mlango-Nlangoes and only a coincidence, it would be a Treat. And
Mr. Bumps always gave his family a Treat when he came home from
sea. He said nothing whatever to the children meanwhile about his
friend Jasper in case it should prove a disappointment, though he
told Mrs. Bumps. The following Saturday morning, having locked up
the house, they all set out together in their best clothes, and
caught an early train.

Emmanuel and Kate had never been to London before. They sat, each
of them in a corner, staring out of the carriage window so
intently at the fields and meadows and villages and churches and
hills and farms gliding by that they both of them had only just
finished the buns Mrs. Bumps had bought for them to eat on the
journey when the train steamed into the great glass-roofed cavern
of a station called Waterloo--after (as Mr. Bumps explained) the
great Duke of Wellington, the Iron Duke, Old Nosy.

They had the whole day before them, and Mr. Bumps, when he gave
them a Treat, never wasted a minute. He at once led them all off
into an omnibus and they went, first to Westminster Abbey, then
to see the soldiers on their horses in Whitehall, then to St.
Paul's Cathedral. And there Mr. Bumps showed them through the
brass grating where the body of Lord Nelson reposed in his tomb
made of the cannon he had captured from the French. "He was a
great sailor, was Lord Nelson," said Mr. Bumps.

"Do you mean a sailor just like you, Daddy?" piped out Topsy.

"Ssh! Topsy!" whispered Mrs. Bumps. "You mustn't call out like
that. It's a church."

In St. Paul's Churchyard, on a seat in the open--for the sun was
shining, though it was rather cold--they ate the lunch which Mrs.
Bumps had packed into her wicker basket. Then, after seeing where
the two little Princes had slept for the last time in the Tower
of London, they had tea in a tea shop. The three children had a
boiled egg each, but Mr. and Mrs. Bumps preferred theirs poached.
After that they had some Bath buns and plenty of cake. Then they
all went out again. And after letting them look for a little
while into the shop windows in Cheapside, and especially a
toyshop bowered in with a great plane tree like an immense
umbrella, Mr. Bumps--as if he had suddenly made up his
mind--packed them all into a hackney cab and off they went to the
Fortune.

Though Mr. Bumps was now first mate of _The Old Lion_, he was
not yet a rich man, so he could not afford to take tickets for
the seats downstairs, except in what is called the Pit. And he
did not take tickets for the Pit because Mrs. Bumps said she
always liked to look down when she went to a theater. They were
extremely early and by good luck there were five seats available
in the Upper Circle, and these in the very middle of the front
row. Very pleased they were to be able to sit quietly in these
stuffed easy seats and to rest and watch the people, after
walking about such a long time in London. Indeed, they had hardly
settled themselves in, when little Kate, who was only five and
tired out, fell fast asleep in her chair.

Topsy and Emmanuel, however, stayed wide awake, sucking their
peardrops (because Mrs. Bumps had thought the seats too dear for
bull's-eyes) , and whispering and chattering and watching
everything that went on. They had never in all their lives seen
so many fine ladies with bare shoulders and diamonds in their
hair, or so many gentlemen in long, black coats and tall collars.

One by one the members of the band, some carrying their
instruments, came edging their way to their seats in front of the
stage, and began to tune up or softly tootle on their oboes and
trombones. The drummer, too, thumped softly on his drums, but not
on his triangle or cymbals. And last came the conductor with his
ivory wand.

"What's that for?" chirped Emmanuel.

"That," said Mrs. Bumps, "is to do the music with."

The conductor sat down on his little velvet seat and waited.

Mr. Bumps took out his silver watch. "Sharp on the hour," he
whispered to Mrs. Bumps. "I wonder what they are waiting for."

He had no need to wonder long. For suddenly at a signal the
conductor with white-gloved hand lifted his wand, and to a crash
of music that nearly startled poor little Kate out of her wits,
everybody in the theater stood up and the band played the
National Anthem. Sure enough, in a moment or two there came into
a great box beside the stage which had been trimmed up with holly
and mistletoe, first the King of England himself, then the Queen,
then their son, the Prince of Wales, and then a little foreign
princess with black ringlets and a tiny fan. They were followed
by a few nice-looking but splendid ladies and gentlemen; and the
King stood in front of the box, in the middle of it, while the
anthem went on.

"That's the King," whispered Mr. Bumps to Emmanuel.

"And that's the Queen," said Mrs. Bumps. "And there, see, Topsy,
see, Manny, see, Kitty, that's the Prince of Wales!"

It was a long time before little Kate could see at all, she had
been so dead asleep. When the last note had been played, they all
five cheered as loud as they could, and so did the other people
in the theater. The King bowed. They cheered again. Then he sat
down; and slowly, quietly, in heavy folds, the curtain ascended
and the performance began.

First came acrobats, in tights and spangles. Next came a juggler
and his small daughter. It looked as if the balls and hoops and
dinner plates they juggled with were things alive. After the
juggling there came a man who sang "The Bay of Biscay," though
Mr. Bumps knew a good deal more about the Bay than he did. And
after him the five silent-footed Ethiopian Elephants debouched
one after the other on to the stage.

At the sight of them, though the three children opened their
mouths like O's and clapped till it hurt, Mr. Bumps himself could
scarcely breathe. But not of course because he had never seen
elephants before. Far from that. He had seen quantities of
elephants--either walking about, wild and tranquil, in the black
man's swamps in Africa, or lying caked with mud in the heat of
the tropic sun, or fountaining one another with cascades of
silvery water at the close of day. And even though these five did
clever tricks, he had watched others at far more useful ones in
their own country. Not that he despised the elephants, he was
only used to them.

No; Mr. Bumps was waiting for Doctor Jasper and could scarcely
endure the delay. He was waiting for Doctor Jasper in his "Grand
New Act"--as the playbills
 said, an act "especially invented for the August Amusement of
Royalty; and patronized by the Shah of Persia, the Emperor of
Abyssinia, and other all-powerful Potentates." And he knew now
that before he could count fifty it would begin.

The huge, ponderous beasts, having bowed, kneeling, in their
green and silver, to express their thanks for the applause, were
shuffling off toward the back of the stage. There, as the lights
dimmed, they stood in a row, their trunks uplifted above their
heads. There came a pause; and then a slender shaft of pearly
light struck down from on high toward the wings. A sudden
trumpeting broke out from the elephants' throats, a trumpeting
loud enough to drown the strains of twenty orchestras.

And into the beam of light--it moving with him as he went--there
came tripping softly forward--a trailing cloak of crimson velvet
edged with real gold lace upon his shoulders, a tall cap of sable
surmounted by a plume of _aracatan_ feathers pinned with a
diamond in front of it upon his head, a little silver-gilt
scepter in his right hand--Jasper. No longer now a medico of
fashion, prescribing pills for the Countess of Crumpet, but
himself Almighty Emperor of All the Ethiopians, the All-Excellent
Ammanabi Nana Dâh.

Following in his train came two small fuzz-wigged pygmy
blackamoors in ostrich feathers and in robes of silk, of yellow
and vermilion. One of these was carrying the Emperor's royal
sunshade, and the other (for it was very light in weight) his
gilded throne. And these were followed by Signor Antonio (Mr.
Smith), no longer either a manservant or a countess, but one of
the Emperor's tallest and lankiest wives!

When the trumpeting of the elephants had died down and the
cymbals and drums had ceased to sound, there went up such a roar
of voices in the theater from the people in it that it was heard
outside for half a mile in all directions. Even the King of
England, seated smiling in his Royal Box, could not remember to
have been greeted with a louder _Huzza_. And then, almost as if
this prodigious noise itself had caused it, an utter quiet fell.
The Emperor, having gathered his crimson skirts around him, his
scarlet sunshade like a huge mushroom over his head, had taken
his seat upon his throne. The royal twelve-whiskered leopard
skins had been laid about his feet.

He sat there a moment--small, upright-perfectly still, and looked
on them all. Not a tongue wagged, not a sigh or a cough sounded
in all the theater. The only stir, and no one noticed it, was
that little Kate, who had never before seen such things or
anything like them, ducked down her head out of sight of the
stage and hid her face in her mother's lap.

The Emperor Jasper looked around him. He was accustomed now to
the glare and the sea of faces and the plaudits and the laughter.
He knew where he was, and he knew too-though he himself alone
could tell it-who and what he was. And perhaps for this reason,
as he sat there peering out of his splendor, the host of those
who were looking at him felt a peculiar coldness stealing in
their blood.

It was not only as if they were uneasy in his presence--the tiny,
motionless head, the intent eyes--but also as if they were
frightened. Even the Queen, in her disquiet, glanced sidelong at
the King, but the King was looking at the Emperor. And the
Emperor at this moment, having very gently lifted his minute left
hand, had opened his lips to speak....

Perhaps if Mr. Bumps had thought all this over for a moment or
two he would have remained quietly seated with his family in the
front row of the Upper Circle and would have said nothing. He
would have waited till the end of the performance, and then found
his way round to the Stage Door, and sent in to the Manager his
card--his visiting card--which he had had printed when he had
been made first mate of _The Old Lion: Mr. John Bumps, First
Mate_ Of THE OLD LION, 7 _The Transoms, Portsmouth_. That would
have been the right thing to do. But Mr. Bumps, being a seaman
and not used to holding himself back when anything that needed
doing was to be done, couldn't wait to think.

Out loud, the only sound in the theater, except that the Emperor
having opened his lips had said, "We," he called "Jasper!..." And
as if on one hinge every face in the theater, and every face even
in the Royal Box, had turned round to look at him. Moreover the
puny Emperor on the stage in his gold and crimson finery had said
not a syllable after that first clear "We"--which he had
pronounced as if it were spelled Oo-_ee_--but had looked at him,
too. All else then but rapture had vanished out of his mind. And,
in the twinkling of an eye, without the least haste, or word, or
sound, or nod, he had risen from his throne, and was softly
pattering toward the footlights, or rather to the side of the
footlights opposite the Royal Box.

Now the stage was framed in, top and side, with a shimmering arch
of carved wood and painted plaster. All kinds of knobbly fruits
and flowers and little cupids and ribbons and dolphins and birds
adorned it, glistening bright with gilt and colors. It was behind
this arch that the curtain rolled down, and the _Fortune_ was
one of the handsomest theaters in London.

In all that quiet, then, slowly and without haste, Jasper began
to climb this arch, his royal robes swinging free behind him.
They were heavy with their gold lace, and he climbed slowly. But
he climbed none the less surely, on and on, and up and up, and
watched by every eye, until he had reached to where Mr. Bumps's
gallery began. Here there ran a low wooden wall to keep the
people from falling out of the gallery. Those in the front row of
this gallery sat in their seats with their knees bent, looking
over this low wall at the stage, and-to make it comfortable for
their elbows as well as to look nice-the top of it had been
padded with horsehair and covered with a maroon-colored stuff
called plush.

So it was with no sound at all from his small five-toed feet that
Jasper came--hastening, now--alone, along this wall in front of
the people seated there, their faces in the reflected glow of the
footlights looking as white as china. Straight along this dizzy
path he silently tippeted until he reached the place where Mr.
Bumps was sitting. There he stopped. He looked at Mr. Bumps and
bowed his head. Then he said something that few heard and nobody
understood. He put out his hands toward Mr. Bumps. And the two
friends were restored to one another.




Now all this time the people had sat perfectly still, watching.
But when they witnessed what had happened--and these two there,
Jasper and Mr. Bumps--though they didn't really know what to say
or think, they all began to talk, and some to shout or even to
hoot. They were angry. They were being cheated. This was not what
they had paid all that money to see! Poor Mrs. Bumps could even
hear what those near by were saying. She was growing more and
more hot and discomfited. "O John! O John!" she kept repeating.

And now the manager, whom Jasper had come to like even less and
less as his nights had gone by, appeared, marching on to the
stage. He bowed to the King, he bowed to the Queen, he bowed to
the Prince of Wales, and he called out in a loud voice that he
was very sorry for what had happened. He said he was very sorry
to them all. He said that he had paid pounds and pounds of money
for Jasper to come and amuse them, and now here was this man up
there enticing him away. He bawled out, "Emperor Jasper, Emperor
Jasper, come down, sir!"

Then some voices in the back parts of the theater shouted, "Turn
him out!" and a great clamor began, some yelling this and some
that, and the manager standing alone, fat and black and helpless
in the middle of the stage, cajoling in vain Jasper to come back.
As for Mr. Smith, since he was dressed up as one of the Emperor's
wives, and was a born actor, he felt that it was not his place to
speak, especially before royalty. His eyes rolled in his
black-dyed face but he said nothing.

Meanwhile, safe with his Mr. Bumps again, Jasper had made not the
faintest sign that he had ever heard the manager's call. And now,
louder and louder, many voices were shouting, "Send him back!"
and some were bellowing, "Let him stay!" And the uproar grew
worse and worse.

At last the King himself stood up in the Royal Box and raised his
hand. There was at once a great hush in the theater. Everybody
fell silent. The King said, "Whose monkey is this marvel?"

With a frowning countenance he looked down upon the manager. And
the manager answered not a word. Then the King turned his eyes
toward Mr. Bumps. He said, "Let that man stand up." And Mr. Bumps
stood up.

"Who are you?" said the King.

"I am John Bumps, may it please your Majesty," said Mr. Bumps
simply. "First mate of _The Old Lion_, now lying at Portsmouth."

"What are you doing here?" said the King.

"I came, your Majesty--and this is Mrs. Bumps beside me with the
children--I came in hopes of seeing an old friend again."

"Who?" said the King.

Mrs. Bumps was now clutching tight her husband's hand, since it
was hidden by the plush-topped wooden wall. His voice faltered.
He touched with his other hand Jasper's sable cap.

"This, sir," he said.

"You mean," said the King, smiling, "his Serene Mightiness, the
All-Excellent Ammanabi Nana Dâh? Beseech his Mightiness to stand
forth."

This good humor of the King greatly pleased all the people
present, and every eye was now fixed on Mr. Bumps.

"_Now_, Jasper," whispered he, "the King of England is speaking
to 'ee."

Jasper blinked but once at his old friend, pressed the finger
clasped tight in his hand, and stood up on the plush parapet,
before them all.

And the King, his eyes twinkling, said, "Is it your wish, cousin,
that you remain with our loyal subject, Mr. Bumps, or"--and he
swept his hand toward the manager and the footlights. An
instant's silence followed.

And then, "Thissee Misster Bumpss, ssir," piped Jasper, for he
had never quite mastered his s's, "thissee Misster Bumpss, ssir,
iss my _firsst_ friend. Mr. Ssmith iss my o-ther friend. My
_firsst iss_...." But the next word which was _firsst_ was
almost drowned by the shout of delight from a thousand throats
that went up to the roof of the theater like the roar of an
avalanche. It was fortunate for the manager that he had already
left the stage and gone into the back parts of the theater.

And then and there Mr. Bumps and Mrs. Bumps and the three
children and Jasper were conducted down to the Royal Box and were
presented to His Majesty. And first the King and then the Queen
and then the Prince of Wales and then the little foreign princess
shook hands with Jasper, and he spoke to them. And the King
slipped a ring off his own finger and hung it round the neck of
the Ethiopian Emperor. They met, one might say, as equals.

But Mr. Bumps being a sailor and an honest man, when the theater
was empty and the lights were out and the people gone away, sat
down in a little back room behind the stage with the manager and
Mr. and Mrs. Smith, while Mrs. Bumps and the children waited for
them in Jasper's dressing room. Here, the four of them, over a
bottle of port wine, made a bargain together, so that the manager
should not lose too much money. The bargain was that for the
whole of the next three days, except when it was time for dinner
or tea, Jasper should sit on the stage of the _Fortune_ in his
gold and crimson, the King's ring dangling round his neck, his
cap of sable on his head, while every man, woman, or child who
wished and could pay to see him, passed along--in at one door and
out at another--before his throne. And of the cash they might
take at the doors, it was agreed that the manager should keep
half, Mr. Smith a quarter, and Jasper a quarter. Mr. Bumps would
take nothing. In those three days the manager made more profit
than he had ever made before in a whole month!

When the three days were over, Mr. Bumps's leave from his ship
was over, too, and they all went down to Portsmouth. By the
kindness of the captain of _The Old Lion_, it had been arranged
that Jasper should come aboard--it was his wish--and return to
Africa. He might, if he had so chosen, have stayed in England and
lived in a palace for the rest of his life. His fame had run like
wildfire through the Kingdom, and far beyond it. Telegrams had
come from Paris and Rome and Vienna and Budapest, and all parts
of America, entreating him to visit them.

Apart from telegrams, the postman brought Jasper a small sack of
letters every morning-from old ladies in the country who wished
to adopt him, from learned professors of Oxford and Cambridge who
wished to share his wisdom, from cunning men who hoped to make
money out of him, and from all kinds of people grown-up and
otherwise who asked him to put his name in their birthday books.
And the King did not forget him. But Jasper refused
everything--except the birthday books; he pined only for home.

In the meantime he himself made many presents to all his friends,
and especially to little Kate, according to what he thought they
would like best. The rest of his money--after he had said good-by
to Mr. Johnson--had been packed in the cellar at the bank into
twenty-eight small chests or coffers. These were piled up in the
cabin that had been prepared for him on _The Old Lion_. And a
nice pile they made.

Besides this, with the captain's consent, Jasper and Mr. and Mrs.
Bumps had bought a large quantity of all kinds of trinkets, toys,
linen and silk, dainties and beverages that would not rust or
tarnish or go bad upon the voyage, whatever weather they might
encounter. Jasper had thought of everything that his own people
round about Dondo might fancy and enjoy. And the King had
commanded that on this voyage _The Old Lion_ should fly not the
red ensign but at the main truck the Royal Standard.

A crowd of people so vast thronged the quay and the windows and
the roofs of the houses near by to see Jasper off that some of
those in the front row were tumbled into the water. All except
one had nothing worse than a sousing and were picked up by
rowboats. But the manager unfortunately, who had pushed past some
small boys for a better view, was drowned. The best brass band in
Portsmouth played Rule Britannia, and to the strains of Rio
Grande the men of _The Old Lion_ weighed anchor.

  Oh _say_, were you ever in Rio Grande?--
    _Awa-ay_, Rio!
  It's there that the rivers run down golden sand--
    _And we're bound for the Rio Grande._
  _And awa-ay, Rio!-away, Rio!_
  _Sing, fare you well, my bonny young gal,_
    _We're bound for the Rio Grande!_

She shook, she stirred. Softly a gentle breeze between the blue
sky and the sparkling water bellied out the sails of the ship.
She drew away upon the water, past Nomansland Fort, where a gun
puffed out to greet her, and smalled more and more. By the time
Mrs. Bumps and the three children sat down to tea, she was out of
sight of land.

Mr. Bumps had many a quiet and private talk with Jasper in his
cabin as the days went by. Never had the old ship seen fairer
weather. The two friends were sad at heart, for Mr. Bumps knew
that nothing he could say now would dissuade Jasper from
returning to his own people. That, Jasper assured him, as well as
what words he had could do so, was his _one_ wish; and Mr. Bumps
could say no more.

Now the head village where Mr. Bumps's friend, the chief of the
Mlango-Nlangoes lived, was a mile or more from the banks of the
Quanza. It lay beyond a swamp where there is a forest of
mangroves, the abode of countless crocodiles, though the
two-horned rhinoceroses keep to the river. Between the river and
the swamp (where, if there were hundreds of crocodiles, there
must have been thousands of monkeys!) was a stretch of sand and
green.

In this spot, out of sight of the river, but well in reach of the
trees, the black men whom Mr. Bumps's friend, the chief of the
Mlango-Nlango tribe, had very kindly lent him for the purpose,
brought up not only Jasper's crates and tubs and boxes and
barrels of rare nuts and fruits, fruits in sirup, biscuits,
beads, gewgaws, and so forth, but also his money chests crammed
tight with sovereigns and silver. For nothing that Mr. Bumps or
Mr. Johnson or Mr. and Mrs. Smith could say could persuade Jasper
that all this money of his was just that and nothing more, and
would be of no more use to his friends in their treetops, except
perhaps for the beauty of it, than nutshells or pebblestones. It
had been given to him, he kept saying, for what he had done; and
therefore he would like to take it all back to his people--except
of course what he wished to spend on the presents he had given to
Mr. Bumps and his other friends.

Since, then, Jasper, however much they argued, still wished to
take back his money with him, Mr. Bumps had said of course, "Let
it be so." Just as the King had said.

When all Jasper's possessions had been piled up in the open space
between the hidden river and the forest which he had chosen for
his camping place, and when a small bell tent had been pitched
for him beside them, it was evening. Strange voices of all manner
of animals and birds sounded in their ears when Mr. Bumps bade
his friend good-night.

"I hope, Jasper," he said, "ay, and more than hope, that your
kith and kin over there will be pleased to see you. I hope so.
But they have been keeping mighty quiet." He said it with a faint
heart, smiling at his little friend dressed up, as he had himself
decided, in his robes of gold and crimson, his sable cap on his
head. Still, since Mr. Bumps had promised to come back in the
morning, this was not good-by. It was only good-night.

When Mr. Bumps did come back in the morning, Jasper greeted him
sadly enough. Though he had heard in the night faint chatterings
and shufflings, not a single friend of all he had known in past
times--not one--had come near him. So at Mr. Bumps's advice they
unpacked some of the boxes and crates containing the dainties
that smelled sweetest and strongest, and strewed them about in
enticing piles some little distance away from Jasper's tent and
nearer the forest.

Next morning these had vanished; and yet Jasper had remained
solitary and unvisited in his tent all the night long. He had not
slept a wink. Never mind, he told Mr. Bumps; his friends were no
doubt shy and timid. He was sure they would be pleased to see him
and longed to speak to him and welcome him back.

But morning after morning the piles grew less and less; the food
was all gone; the toys and trinkets were scattered out of the
boxes; only the money, the sovereigns and the silver, were left.
And these the monkeys, having smelled and fingered them, left
disowned. Jasper thought at last it must be his royal robes, his
antelope-slippers, his cap, and his colors that kept his people
from knowing who he was. He said this, smiling, to his friend Mr.
Bumps, but not as if he quite believed it.

That evening when they parted again, the air over Africa was
heavy and stagnant and the sky lowering. Silent lightnings
gleamed ever and again above the distant forests, and they could
hear the tom-toms of the Mlango-Nlangoes sullenly drumming from
their hidden
 dancing places. Jasper had stripped himself of all his finery,
and stood up beside his tent only in his own fur--a little
monkey, as he was before. Mr. Bumps shook him by the hand.

"Good-night, old friend," he said, "and God-speed."

When he came back the next morning after the storm, the cap and
the robes and the slippers and the gilded scepter were gone. The
tent had been blown away. And Jasper was gone, too. Mr. Bumps
called and called and called. He came back in the evening and
called again. No voice answered him. The forest lay dark and
silent. Three days, by the kindness of the captain, to whom he
had sent a black man as messenger, he waited and waited. But he
waited in vain. And on the fourth _The Old Lion_ sailed away.


[End of _Mr. Bumps and his Monkey_ by Walter de la Mare]